# Musculoskeletal-and-Integumentary-Systems
## Lessions 1: Functions of skeletal system
Anthropology, stature, bone=dynamic, osteoporosis, dry bone=osseous tissue, Articular cartilage, dense connective tissue, 
dense irregular or dense regular connective tissue can be found in  periosteum=found outer protect bone except in Articular cartilage region, 
when we're talking about ligaments and tendons, those are going to be a type of density regular connective tissue.
Epithelial tissue=important in terms of paranasal sinuses. So if you think of my sinuses are acting up, it's typically an inflammation of this epithelial tissue.
adipose tissue and the neurovasculature=nerve, artery, and vein
nerves are important in terms of communicating with your central nervous system, so your brain and your spinal cord. Artery is what's bringing the supply to bones, so blood supply. And then veins are going to drain the blood, so returning to the heart.
marrow cavity or the medullary cavity, And within that, in a living individual, you can have that yellow fat marrow. That's very important in terms of energy storage called adipose tissue.
bone is dynamic structure, changes throughout life unlike dry bone

skeletal system=support system=allows for us to stay in bipedally and on two legs
in terms of as an attachment point=these ligaments and these tendons actually attaching to certain parts of the bone=muscle tendons particularly when you have these big bumps
protect certain other internal organs= skull, that calvaria or skullcap protecting the brain=rib cage or thorax protecting your lungs as well as your heart.
thyroid gland and your parathyroid glands, that will help keep certain amounts of calcium within the bone or release it if need be. Phosphorus is another mineral that's stored within the bone, not as quite as high amounts as calcium, but it will play a role in terms of mineral release and storage as well.

hemopoiesis=all types of blood cell production, red blood cells, white blood cells etc and that's going to be formed within red bone marrow. 
red bone marrow
Juvenile bones are going to have huge amounts of red bone marrow
adulthood, there's only going to be certain areas of bone that are actually going to form red blood cells.
epiphyses, these are going to be the ends of long bones and then in certain other bones such as your os coxa or hip bones, certain areas in terms of the ribs in adulthood will still form these red blood cells.
adulthood, a lot of that red bone marrow is differentiated into yellow bone marrow, yellow bone marrow is what we think about when we think about marrow. It's that fatty tissue that's actually within the hollow portions of the bone. . It's important in terms of triglyceride storage so that fatty storage as energy storage for these yellow bone marrow.


## Lessions 2: Osseous tissue and cells
how it get hard, focuse on extracellular matrix, histological slide of bone tissue,  about 15% of water, but what I want us to focus on really are these 30% of collagen fibers(organic material) and these 55% of crystallized mineral salts(inorganic material). Collagen fibers=organic material of the extracellular matrix and this is going to be secreted by certain cells referred to as osteoblasts. anytime you see this term blast, you know that something is being secreted. In this case, we're talking about the organic material and then, inorganic materials=55% of the extracellular matrix or those minerals. Specifically, hydroxyapatite=i misspell it all the time. So, this(inorganic materials, specially hydroxyapatite) is what's going to harden with the presence of these collagen fiber.  it's important to note, that you're not going to have the hardness of the bone without the presence of the organic material, so those secretions of the osteoblasts.  would you have collagen and why would you have this component that supposedly is going to make the bone softer? Because with that minerals, that's what's really making it structurally sound, collagen fibers=prevent against tensile pressures=not allowing the bone to shatter, flexibility in the bone in order to deal with the shocks, if you didn't have collagen fibers, you would have this really brittle bone, so equally fragile. So, you need both components to really get the structurally sound and capable of movement, a bone cyst or skeletal system that we have.

Cells in Osseous Tissue, four cells in the osseous tissue, first is Osteoprogenitor Cells (or Osteogenic Cells), and these are examples of stem cells that differentiate/develops into osteoblast cell, These are going to be found in higher densities associated with the outer surfaces of bone(periosteum), and within that medullary cavity as well(endosteum), and these are going to differentiate into osteoblasts. there's that term again, the blast. So we know, that this is going to be important in terms of that extracellular matrix. So, these(osteoblasts) are what are actually building the bone. So, building that extracellular matrix that will eventually ossify or calcify, and create the hard bone that we're familiar with. So, you're going to have these(osteoblasts) also in higher densities associated with that outer edge of the bone, as well as within that medullary cavity. Now, what happens with those osteoblasts, they're going to secrete the extracellular matrix, they are going to keep surrounding itself with extracellular matrix or secretion, and eventually, it will lock itself in, and then you're going to have what the creation of what's referred to as an osteocyte, and these are the main cells or the mature bone cells. So, once there's no more secretion of extracellular matrix, that's when you're going to have the development of these osteocytes.  Now, it's important to note that these cells are not dead. So, not what we had in terms of the epidermis with those corneocytes, these cells are still doing something. They're still communicating with other osteocytes in order to upkeep the daily metabolism of the bone tissue. One thing I want you to know with this really nice illustration are all these processes of the osteocytes. What's going to happen is that these processes are going to communicate with processes of another osteocyte, so being able to actually communicate between cells. Lastly, the fourth cell I want you to know are the osteoclast. Anytime you have this suffix of clast, that's going to mean resorption, or bone, or some type of breakdown. In this case, it's going to be the breakdown of bone tissue. Now, this seems like a bad thing, but it's actually part of very normal processes. In order to keep the bone tissue strong and healthy, you're going to have to break down some of the older tissue. It also can have implications if osteoclastic activity is bumped up. So, that's the case of what's happening in terms of osteoporosis, where it going to break down bone without having new bone formed by the osteoblasts. Osteoclasts are huge cells. So, huge in comparison to the other cells that we just discussed. Also, right in this region right here, you have what's referred to as a ruffled border. So this is a very extremely infolded type of plasma membrane, and from here, you're going to have secretions of a lysosomal or enzymes, so very high in terms of its acid content in order to actually break down the bone. Now, one thing I want to note, is that the first three cells that we discuss, the osteogenic cells, the osteoblasts, and osteocytes are part of the lifecycle of one type of cell. So, an osteogenic cell will turn into(differentiate into) an osteoblast, that osteoblast(forms bone matrix) will secrete that extracellular matrix and keep surrounding itself until it doesn't secrete anymore, and once that occurs, then that's referred to as osteocytes(maintains bone tissues). So, the end of the life cycle in terms of this, is the osteocyte important in terms of that daily metabolism. Now, this osteoclast is its own thing. It's not part of this lifecycle, it's actually going to form by the creation or the coagulation of 50 monocytes, or up to 50 monocytes. So, it's a completely different lifecycle, but also just as important in terms of actually breaking down the bone and allowing for healthy bone to stay.

Compact v. Spongy Bone,  different names for the same thing(terminology), when we're talking about compact bone sometimes you can hear compact bone referred to as cortical or dense bone, and then in terms of spongy bone, you may hear the terms trabecular or cancellous. Now, a lot of times I will use the term trabecular because really this type of bone is composed of trabeculae or these tiny spines/spicules of bone. So, this is a femur that has been sectioned, sagittally sectioned, and it's really nice in terms of showing you the two different types of bone. I'm talking about these trabeculae these little spines of bone right here, and this is going to be that trabecular or spongy bone. Whereas you can see this much denser compact bone there's a really making up that strong portion of the diaphysis or the shaft of the bone. 
compact bone, it's a bit more solid so it's going be really important in terms of resisting bending, and this is going to form the external layers of all bones. So, even bones that are made up of almost exclusively spongy bone are going to have a layer of compact bone. So, every single bone is going to have a layer of compact bone. Also important in terms of the bulk of the shafts or the diaphysis of all long bones. So, you can see right here, this is compact bone and you'll have it in the majority of the long portion of long bones.

Whereas spongy bone, is going to be important in terms of strength in terms of compression. So, you'll have these in areas where you have joints. So, on the ends of bones are these epiphyses, these are going to be made up of almost exclusively spongy bone except for a small layer like I was saying of that compact bone. So, right around here even though the majority of this is made up of spongy bone, you're going to have compact bone on the edges. Now, these are going to contain larger spaces, and this is important for two main reasons. First, this really reduces the weight of the bone. If you think about it if all bound was made up of compact bone or that heavier bone, we wouldn't be able to move as freely as we do. So, it really reduces the weight it also serves as protection of that red bone marrow or of yellow bone marrow. So, remember in our previous presentation red bone marrow is important in terms of blood cell formation. So, really important in terms of protection of that. Now, where are you going to find spongy bone? The majority of your short bones. So, your carpal bones are examples of short bones. Flat bones, so the majority of your skullcap or calvaria area are composed of flat bones and irregular bones, and the best example of irregular bones are your vertebrae, or the bones that make up your spinal column. Last but not least these epiphyses or these ends of long bones, are going to be made up of spongy bone as well.

Components of Compact Bone, what is giving the compact bone that tree ring-like appearance? It's these neighboring osteons, or these structural units. Sometimes you'll hear osteons referred to as Haversian systems, or the eponym in terms of osteons. That's what is giving this very distinct tree ring-like appearance that you have. Now, these osteons or these structural units are very well-organized. They're going to be organized along lines of stress. So, if a certain type of stress is always occurring on a bone, these osteons are going to form in such a way, in order to protect or to keep the bones structurally sound. These osteons change throughout life. You'll have the formation of new osteons, and you'll have osteons break down. So, they're constantly changing as part of this dynamic skeletal system. Now, if you look at a single osteon, let's talk about the components within that structural unit. You're going to have concentric lamellae, and that is the actual ring portions of the osteon, and these are just that mineralized or that hardened extracellular matrix. Dotted within that concentric lamellae, you're going to have the mature bone cells, or the osteocytes. Now, in the middle of the osteons, so if you look at a histological slide, you'll have that dark portion. That's the central canal(passageway for neurovasculature and lymphatics). So, you can see it right here, with the red and the blue, and anytime you see red and blue, when you're looking at an anatomical illustration, you know red means artery, blue means vein, and then yellow is typically going to be the nerve. So, you'll have not only the nerve, artery, and vein, you'll also have lymphatics that are going to drain areas in terms of the bone, drain length from the bone. Now, within that extracellular matrix, or within the concentric lamellae, you'll have these little holes, or lacunae. Lacunae actually means, "a lake" In Latin. So, you could think of these little lakes within the concentric lamellae, that are going to have osteocytes, or those mature cells sitting within. So they're going to have these multiple ones associated with each osteon. So you can see here's a close up of that. You'll have the osteocytes sitting in this lacunae, or this kind of pit-like region. Now, kind of extensions of these lacunae are one of the coolest words in anatomy, canaliculi, and that's these extensions of the lacunae that are allowing for these processes to sit in there. Remember I said the osteocytes they're still alive. They're not secreting extracellular matrix anymore. They're important in terms of communication between different osteocytes, also allowing for exchange of nutrients, the removal of waste associated with the osteons structural unit. Now, like I said, osteons are going to be dynamic. They're going to change throughout life. You'll have the formation of new osteons. You'll also have the breakdown of old osteons. That's what this interstitial lamellae are. So, you'll have these nice structurally sound osteons, and then you're going to have fragments of older osteons, which will eventually break down completely, and all that waste will be removed from the bone. But you can still see these fragments of older osteons that could still have osteocytes within, you could still have those canaliculi in there as well. Now, in order for neurovasculature to get into the bone, you're going to have these perforating or Volkmann's canals, and I really like this illustration here. You can see, obviously, that blood supply has to move into the bone. So, you'll have these transverse canals that will lead into the central canal. So, penetrating not only the periosteum, but also that compact bone, to allow for the neurovasculature to get into the bone. That's a really important thing I want to note here. I want to stop here. Neurovasculature is very important in terms of allowing bone to be dynamic. If you didn't have the arterial supply that's going to supply oxygen and different nutrients to the bone, you wouldn't be able to change. So, there's going to be these perforating canals throughout the entirety of the bone. Then lastly, the last part I want to discuss is the circumferential lamellae, and importantly, you'll have this along the outer edges of the bone, and these are almost like super wide concentric lamellae, but in terms of the entirety of the bone. One other thing I want to note here is that the periosteum, that outer connective tissue layer, is going to be closely adhered to the circumferential lamellae. So, in fact, you're going to have components of that connective tissue actually moving into the bony matrix at this concentric lamellae. Now, circumferential lamellae is important in terms of appositional growth, and we'll talk about this in a lot more detail. But appositional growth means growth in terms of bone width, not length, but width. So, you're going to have a lot of those osteogenic cells and osteoblasts in this area for the formation of new osteons when you're having growth in terms of width.
concentric lamellae vs Interstitial lamellae 


Let's discuss the different parts of a long bone and we're going to use this image of a posterior femur quite a bit because it's really nice. It's the longest of your long bones. It's really nice in terms of visualizing these different parts. So, the two main parts, you're going to have your epiphysis, and then the femur, you're actually going to have multiple epiphysis. These are going to be the ends of long bones. So, important in terms of joint formation. That's what these epiphysis are going to join up with the epiphysis of another long bone, and then you're going to have the diaphysis in the middle and what's making up the bulk of the long bone. So sometimes, you'll hear the term shaft or body of certain bones. These are all synonymous with diaphysis. So, epiphysis and then diaphysis in the middle. Now, in a growing individual, you're going to have an additional component and this is referred to as the metaphysis. So, this is going to be the region between the epiphysis and the diaphysis, and in a growing individual, this is going to be a block of hyaline cartilage. So, you'll hear the term epiphyseal plate. This epiphyseal plate is composed of hyaline cartilage and that cartilage will actually grow. The cartilage will grow and then eventually be replaced by bone, so increasing the length of that diaphysis or the shaft of the bone. Now, once an individual reaches about 18 in terms of females, about 21 in terms of males, all these epiphyseal plates will be completely replaced by bone and your bones will stop growing in terms of length. Now, there's other components of the bone that I want you to be familiar with and some we've discussed in a little bit of detail. The articular cartilage is the first. So, you'll have these on all those epiphyseal or ends of the long bones. So, important in terms of additional shock absorption. Also important to note, this is going to be composed of cartilage. Cartilage does not have a very high blood supply. So, without blood supply, that indicates that these type of tissues do not heal as well. So, with damage to your articular cartilage, you're not going to have the replacement with new cartilage and that's where you can get a lot of that bone pain in terms of joints. So, you're going to have the bones actually rubbing up against one another and that's a very bad thing. So, articular cartilage, you're going to have on all the ends of long bones. This is actually a remnant of the cartilage model that developed during bone formation. All right, we've discussed a little bit about the periosteum and that's going to be that connective tissue that's going to surround all components of the bone except for in areas where the articular cartilage is. So, the periosteum is composed of two different layers. You're going to have a tough fibrous outer layer and almost all outer layers when we're talking about different areas of anatomy are important in terms of protection. So you have a tough fibrous layer and then you have a more inner osteogenic layer. Remember how I was talking about those osteoblasts and osteoclasts? They're going to be sitting in this in-between region between the bone and the periosteum. So, important in terms of bones differentiating into osteoblasts and secreting that extracellular matrix. Also, you're going to have what's referred to as perforating or Sharpey's fibers. These are going to be certain fibers that are actually going to enter into that bony matrix to really allow for a close adherence between the periosteum and the compact bone. All right. Now, the periosteum is going to surround the outer layers of the bone and then within this region, you're going to have what's referred to as the medullary cavity. You can see that right here, the medullary cavity. Now, in dry bone, in bone that isn't living anymore, this is completely hollow. There's no neurovasculature in there. There's no bone marrow. But during life, it's a very important region in terms of that triglyceride storage, so that yellow bony marrow, as well as in terms of neurovasculature. Lining the edges of this medullary cavity is what's referred to as the endosteum, so the counterpart of the periosteum but within the medullary cavity. So, very similar in terms of structure, in terms of connective tissue structure. You also have a lot of osteoblasts and osteoclasts associated with the endosteum. One other thing I want you to note in terms of this is this very strong prolific arterial or vasculature supply. So, bone is going to have a lot of arterial supply allowing for bone to continue to change throughout life except for in this cartilaginous region. So, really important in terms when we start getting into arthritis and so forth, this articular cartilage is going to play a big role.


We're going to begin our discussion in terms of ossification. An ossification is just a fancy word for bone development. So, how does the bone develop in utero. Just a warning, ossification is traditionally or historically probably the most difficult component of the skeletal system in terms of understanding. So, really take your time, re-watch these videos in order to get a good understanding of how bone actually develops. Bone starts to develop around the sixth week of embryonic development. So, if you've ever been pregnant or know someone that's pregnant, you'll be like, "Oh, bones are starting to form." fairly early on, and what's actually happening is you're having the creation of what's referred to as a mesenchymal skeleton. This term mesenchyme or mesenchymal, will come up over and over again as you talk about different organ systems. This is basically the embryonic connective tissue. So, a lot of the connective tissues of the body are going to start through this embryonic or mesenchymal component. So, that's what's actually starting to develop in the sixth week in utero. Then it'll break up into two main types of ossification. You'll have intramembranous ossification and endochondral ossification. Intramembranous is going to have the complete replacement of that mesenchymal skeleton with bone. Okay? So, fairly easy in terms of it. Now, the endochondral, you'll have an additional step. You'll start with the mesenchymal skeleton, then you're going to have the development and the growth of a cartilage model, and then bone will replace that cartilage model. So, you have this additional step when you're talking about endochondral ossification and you see right here, you have this root 'chondr' which indicates cartilage.

Now, we're going to focus in terms of this presentation, in the intramembranous ossification. Like I said, this is going to be the least complex, but actually most bones of the body actually form through the endochondral ossification. There are other examples that form through intramembranous, or flat bones of the skull. So, the skullcap, also important in terms of your fontanels and fontanels or another. You colloquially refer to these as your soft spots, so you remember touch the top of a baby's head, you have these soft spots, these are going to change into bone eventually through intramembranous ossification. Most of your facial bones, so bones associated with the anterior portion of the skull. Your mandible which is your lower jaw, so the movable part of the skull and the medial part of the clavicle. Your clavicle is colloquially referred to as your collarbone. So, this medial portion of your clavicle forms through intramembranous ossification. So, what is this? How does this actually go from that mesenchymal skeleton to the hard bone that we know? What will actually happen, is you'll have those cells, those mesenchymal cells start to cluster around an area where the bone will eventually form in the juvenile. What you'll have is, you'll have the differentiation of these cells into these osteogenic cells which will eventually form into or change into osteoblasts. Remember, these are those bone forming cells that we've been discussing over and over again. So, right in the middle of where that bone's going to form, you'll have the development of this ossification center and you can see these osteoblasts populating this region right here. Also importantly, what else do we have going on? We have to have blood supply for this to actually work. So, you have to have a blood supply move into the area to cause the differentiation of these cells. Then, you're going to have what's referred to as calcification. Before I move any further, I want to talk about the difference between calcification and ossification. Ossification is the overarching term for bone development. Calcification, a lot of time is utilized to indicate when the bone actually hardens. A lot of times, we use calcification only to indicate pathological, bone hardening, but a lot of times you'll see it used interchangeably with the ossification. It's actually a component or a portion of ossification. So, what's happening is, you had those osteoblasts in the ossification center, it's going to be secreting the extracellular matrix and remember, when it does that, it traps that cell in there and you have those osteocytes or the mature cells. So, you have the calcification or the hardening of bone.

Now, with that, you're going to still have osteoblasts in that area. So, you have the continuous development of new bone, you'll have the osteoclasts breaking down the old bone, and you're going to have the formation of those trabeculae or those spicules of bone, if you remember from the previous presentation. So, development of trabeculae, and if you remember the types of bones that are being formed by intramembranous ossification. So, those flat bones of the skull, you're going to have the medial clavicle. Those are made up of almost exclusively spongy bone, so that's what's happening here. You have the development of those trabeculae, of the spongy bone. Also in utero, as well as in juveniles, you're going to have that red bone marrow populating these spaces within. So, you're going to have that red bone marrow that's forming red blood cells, so very important in terms of that. The last step of intramembranous ossification is the development of the periosteum, so that outside connective tissue layer. So, that's going to be the very last thing that happens. Importantly, you're still going to have that layer of osteoblasts in between the actual bone and the periosteum. So, you can see that in this visual here, these osteoblasts. They won't look exactly like this, of course, but just in terms of the illustration. So, that's it in terms of intramembranous ossification. You're going to go from the mesenchymal skeleton or that embryonic connective tissue skeleton directly into bone. So, in terms of the bones mostly at the skull. So, the next presentation, we're going to talk about the type of ossification that occurs in most of the bones of the body, particularly the long bones and that's endochondral ossification. Endochondral ossification, if you recall, has a extra step. So, the growth of that hyaline cartilage model, that will eventually be replaced by bone.

Previously discussed intramembranous ossification, now we're going to talk about endochondral ossification. So, endochondral ossification will occur through three main steps. You're going to have the mesenchymal skeleton that all bones are going to form through. So, even with intramembranous ossification, you still have that mesenchymal skeleton or that embryonic connective tissue. Then, and what makes endochondral ossification unique, you're going to have a cartilage model. I think this is really cool, that cartilage model not only is present but it actually grows. So, it's going to grow in terms of bone, in terms of length as well as width. So, that's what's going to make this type of ossification unique. Then, lastly, you're going to have the formation of bone. So, three steps instead of the two steps that you had with intramembranous ossification. Even though it's the more complex of the two, most of the bones of your body are going to form this way. So, all the long bones, a good portion of, or some of the skull bones will develop this way, not all of them, but some will and in various regions of the thorax as well. So, let's talk about how this actually occurs. As we discussed, you're going to have a cartilage model. So, this cartilage model's going to replace the mesenchymal model. So, instead of osteoblasts at this level, you're having chondrablasts. Anytime you see chondr, you know we're talking cartilage. So, that's what's happening here. You're also going to have a perichondrium or what's going to be replaced by periosteum actually developing in this region. Now, if you're looking at this illustration, you can see the blue. The blue is representing cartilage, so that hyaline cartilage. But also, I want you to note this region right here. This is actually bone and we refer to this area as the bony collar. What's unique about the bony collar, and this starts fairly early on in terms of endochondral ossification, is that you're going to have bone on the sides of your cartilage model. This keeps the integrity of the cartilage model. It can keep it upright and allow for this to actually grow. This bony collar is unique in the fact that it forms through intramembranous ossification. So, even during endochondral ossification, you're going to have intramembranous ossification forming a little small portion of the bone. So, you have the cartilage model that's going to develop. The second step is going to be the growth of that cartilage model. As I discussed, you're going to have it grow in terms of length, and the fancy anatomy word for that is interstitial growth. Then, as well, you're going to have growth in terms of width and that's going to be referred to as appositional.

So, the cartilage model's going to get longer as well as wider before you have the complete replacement with bone. Also, around this time, you're going to have blood vessels moving into these regions specifically in this middle portion which will form your primary ossification center. So, anytime that you're going to start having this replacement with bone, you have to have associated vasculature. So, you're going to have a vasculature moving into this region, particularly through the nutrient foramina. So, you're going to have nutrient foramina on all long bones, and they're these little bitty small holes that are going to typically be somewhere typically right around the middle of the shaft of the bone, and that gives you an idea of where the primary ossification center for that bone lied or laid previously. So, where it actually is going to have that vasculature moving in there. So, this is basically the first area where bone is really taking over the cartilage model. Now, with that and since it's right in the middle of the bone, particularly in the shaft, you're going to have the development of the medullary cavity. So, obviously, you're going to have osteoblasts secreting osseous tissue but in order for this cavity to exist right here, you're going to have osteoclasts working. So, having breaking down of not only the cartilage model but also any type of bone that was actually formed previously with the primary ossification center. Now, in most long bones right around the time of birth, you're going to have vasculature moving towards the extremities of these bones. These are referred to as epiphyseal vasculature. So, typically, you have an artery and a vein in these regions. This is going to form what's referred to as secondary ossification centers. Usually you'll have it on a proximal end as well as the distal end. So, this generally, you won't have this ossification or this replacement of bone in these regions until after birth. Then lastly, you're going to have the formation of articular cartilage as well as the epiphyseal plate. So, really all the articular cartilage really is just a remnant of that cartilage model. So, if you think about it, that articular cartilage has been there in utero and it can extend into your adult life. So, anytime you have cartilage, you know that this is typically more avascular. So, damage to this cartilage, you're not going to have the ready replacement. So, that has a lot of implications in terms of joint pain. Another remnant of that hyaline cartilage model is the epiphyseal plate or the metaphyseal region. This is where after the cartilage model has been replaced, you're going to have the replacement of bone and the continuous replacement of bone as bone length increases to allow you to get taller as you move into adulthood.


As in most organ systems that we're going to discuss in this series, the skeletal system can be highly affected by aging. There are two main roles and two main ways that it'll actually be affected. First is loss of bone mass, second is going to be brittleness. Now, the bigger one is going to be loss of bone mass. And when you talk about osteoporosis, this is really where this falls in line. What will happen is a demineralization, and that will play a big role in terms of the structural integrity of the bone.

Now just as important, but not as quick, in terms of aging is brittleness. And what can happen here is that the production of collagen slows, so remember what's producing collagen? Or what's producing the organic material in terms of bony tissue? Osteoblasts, so those osteoblasts are going to slow down with age. With that, extracellular matrix is not going to be secreted as quickly, and collagen is going to really slow down. And anytime you don't have that collagen, that's really going to affect the flexibility of the bone, and cause brittleness. So you can have those more severe fractures, those communated fractures, that can occur, with brittleness of bone. So how can you stop this? Well, you can't, first of all, with aging, this is a natural thing that's going to happen. Now, you can slow down these processes in terms of aging effects on the skeletal system. And one of the main ways is through weight-bearing exercise. So you'll hear that a lot, you'll see individuals using small weights. Anything that can be done in order to really get the bone moving. So if you have those muscles contracting, affecting the bone, this can really alter the strength, due to the mechanical stress in this region. So remember, anytime that you have contraction of muscle, that's going to pull on the bone and affect the bone, amp up the osteoblast activity. And keep that relationship between osteoblasts and osteoclasts a little bit more even, so really increasing extracellular matrix. With the extracellular matrix, this is going to allow for those mineral salts to actually calcify, and have the structural strong integrity of bone.
As in most organ systems that we're going to discuss in this series, the skeletal system can be highly affected by aging. There are two main roles and two main ways that it'll actually be affected. First is loss of bone mass, second is going to be brittleness. Now, the bigger one is going to be loss of bone mass. And when you talk about osteoporosis, this is really where this falls in line. What will happen is a demineralization, and that will play a big role in terms of the structural integrity of the bone. Play video starting at ::41 and follow transcript0:41 Now just as important, but not as quick, in terms of aging is brittleness. And what can happen here is that the production of collagen slows, so remember what's producing collagen? Or what's producing the organic material in terms of bony tissue? Osteoblasts, so those osteoblasts are going to slow down with age. With that, extracellular matrix is not going to be secreted as quickly, and collagen is going to really slow down. And anytime you don't have that collagen, that's really going to affect the flexibility of the bone, and cause brittleness. So you can have those more severe fractures, those communated fractures, that can occur, with brittleness of bone. So how can you stop this? Well, you can't, first of all, with aging, this is a natural thing that's going to happen. Now, you can slow down these processes in terms of aging effects on the skeletal system. And one of the main ways is through weight-bearing exercise. So you'll hear that a lot, you'll see individuals using small weights. Anything that can be done in order to really get the bone moving. So if you have those muscles contracting, affecting the bone, this can really alter the strength, due to the mechanical stress in this region. So remember, anytime that you have contraction of muscle, that's going to pull on the bone and affect the bone, amp up the osteoblast activity. And keep that relationship between osteoblasts and osteoclasts a little bit more even, so really increasing extracellular matrix. With the extracellular matrix, this is going to allow for those mineral salts to actually calcify, and have the structural strong integrity of bone. 
​
When discussing the skeletal system, probably the most clinically relevant area is fractures. Secondly, very closely associated is osteoporosis. Osteoporosis is one of the major causes for fractures particularly in older individuals. So, really, what is it? So, let's look at this illustration here. This is a femur, and we're focused in on this spongy bone region. As you can see in typical bone or normal bone, you will still have spaces. That's normal in terms of spongy bone. In osteoporotic bone, that osteoclast activity. So, remember, osteoclasts are resorbing bone. That's going to stay fairly normal in osteoporotic individuals. What isn't normal is osteoblast activity. So, you don't have the replacement of new bone keeping up with the resorption or breaking down of bone. So, what you're going to be left with are these spongy bone regions where you have significantly larger areas and holes within the bone. So, anytime that you don't have bone where you need to be, structurally, that's going to play a big role and can lead to fractures. That's really the number one symptom of osteoporosis. Now typically, they're not the more extreme versions. So, you're not going to have these compound fractures. Generally, you'll have what's referred to as stress fractures, more commonly. But, with more stress fractures, that can lead to those more severe types, so either this comminuted fractures or the compound fractures that we've discussed in previous sections. With fracture, of course you're going to have bone pain. So, you're going to have those sensory neurons sending signals back to the central nervous system saying, "something's going wrong in this area." Even if it's not visible externally, you can generally feel pain in that region. One of the other more common symptoms is shrinkage of vertebrae. With that, you get height loss and you can get a fairly characteristic presentation of kyphosis. Colloquially, we refer to this as "hunchback." So, with time, you can get this kind of very distinct hunching of the back. What's happening and what's actually allowing this to happen is you're going to have a multitude of stress fractures in the body of the vertebrae. The body of vertebrae is composed of almost exclusively spongy bone. So, you'd have these stress fractures that will eventually lead to the collapse of the body of the vertebrae. If you have this occur, multiple vertebrae, that can lead to height loss in individuals with osteoporosis. Now, who does this occur to? Most individuals, if they live long enough, we're going to have some level of osteoporosis. Generally, like I was just discussing, it'll be shown in terms of the vertebrae. You can have it in other areas of the body as well. This typically happens in elderly individuals and even middle-aged individuals. Now, there's a higher incidence in women, not to say the males don't also have osteoporosis. Generally, it's more likely to show up in terms of women. So, in terms of osteoporotic clinical practice, women are going to be the patients more often. This can occur for numerous reasons. The two main reasons are; women just do not have as large of a body build as males typically. So, sexually dimorphic characteristics between women and men, women have smaller body build. Anytime that you had that smaller body build, that has implications in terms of how much spongy bone that is in that area. Secondly, estrogen production slows down in women, as well whereas testosterone in males. Typically, you have normal secretion even later on in life. So, that can play a role in terms of osteoporosis. Other risk factors; family history, like many other disorders. So, if your mother or your grandmother had osteoporosis, you're typically more likely to have it. Ancestry can also play a role. So, individuals of European or Asian ancestry typically have a higher incidence of osteoporosis. As we discussed previously, small body build can play a role, and inactive lifestyle. If you're not doing those weight-bearing exercises that are contracting those muscles and affecting the bone that is attached to, that can really play a role in terms of not changing the bone, not having those osteoblasts secreting at a normal level.







